Recipe for coupled pallets (#272)
JoshOrndorff/recipes: text/3-entrees/storage-api/vec-set.md

# Using Vectors as Sets

_[`pallets/vec-set`](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/recipes/tree/master/pallets/vec-set)_

A [Set](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(abstract_data_type)>) is an unordered data structure
that stores entries without duplicates. Substrate's storage API does not provide a way to declare
sets explicitly, but they can be implemented using either vectors or maps.

> This recipe shows how to implement a storage set on top of a vector, and explores the performance of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This recipe demonstrates how to implement a storage set on top of a vector, and explores the performance of
```

the implementation. When implementing a set in your own runtime, you should compare this technique
to implementing a [`map-set`](./map-set.md).

> In this pallet we implement a set of `AccountId`s. We do not do not use the set for anything in this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this pallet we implement a set of `AccountId`s. We do not use the set for anything in this
```

> pallet; we simply maintain its membership. Using the set is demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pallet; we simply maintain the set. Using the set is demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet
```

> pallet; we merely maintain its membership. Using the set is, demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pallet; we simply maintain its membership. Using the set is demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet
```

coupling](./pallet-couplin.md]. We provide dispatchable calls to add and remove members, ensuring
that the number of members never exceeds a hard-coded maximum.

```rust, ignore
/// A maximum number of members. When membership reaches this number, no new members may join.
pub const MAX_MEMBERS: usize = 16;
```

## Storage Item

We will store the members of our set in a Rust
[`Vec`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html). A `Vec` is a collection of elements that

> is ordered and may contain duplicates. Because the `Vec` provides more functionality than our set

Reviewer 2: `Vec`s are not ordered per se; did you mean to say "indexed"?

Author: Probably. What's the difference? What's a data structure that is "ordered" per se?

I want to communicate that you can iterate a `Vec` and get the items back in the same deterministic order every time. As opposed to something like a hash set.

Reviewer 2: b-trees are sorted for instance, that's the go-to example I guess. Technically it depends a bit on the context: what does "ordered" mean? A `Vec` is "ordered" if the order you care about is insertion order.
I think "indexed" is the more technically correct term here for what you're trying to say. Maybe "A `Vec` is a collection of indexed elements in deterministic order…" or something along those lines?

Reviewer 2: The rust docs say a `Vec` is "A contiguous growable array type". :)

needs, we are able to build a set from the `Vec`. We declare our single storage item as so

```rust, ignore
decl_storage! {
	trait Store for Module<T: Trait> as VecMap {
		// The set of all members. Stored as a single vec
		Members get(fn members): Vec<T::AccountId>;
	}
}
```

In order to use the `Vec` successfully as a set, we will need to manually ensure that no duplicate

> entries are added. And to ensure reasonable performance, we will enforce that the `Vec` always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entries are added. To ensure reasonable performance, we will enforce that the `Vec` always
```

> remain sorted. This allows for quickly determining whether an item is present using a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remains sorted. This allows for quickly determining whether an item is present using a
```

[binary search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_algorithm).

## Adding Members

> Any user may join the membership set by calling the `add_member` dispatchable, so long as they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any user may join the membership set by calling the `add_member` dispatchable, providing they are
```

not already a member and the membership limit has not been reached. We check for these two

> conditions first, and then insert the new member only after we are sure it is safe to do so.

Author: ```suggestion
conditions first, and then insert the new member only after we are sure it is safe to do so.
This is an example of the mnemonic idiom, "**verify first write last**".
```

> conditions first, and then insert the new member only after we are sure it is safe to do so.

Reviewer: Would love to see a note about verify-first-write-last here :rocket:

```rust, ignore
pub fn add_member(origin) -> DispatchResult {
	let new_member = ensure_signed(origin)?;

	let mut members = Members::<T>::get();

> 	ensure!(members.len() < MAX_MEMBERS, Error::<T>::MembershipLimitReached);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	ensure!(members.len() <= MAX_MEMBERS, Error::<T>::MembershipLimitReached);
```

	// We don't want to add duplicate members, so we check whether the potential new
	// member is already present in the list. Because the list is always ordered, we can
	// leverage the binary search which makes this check O(log n).
	match members.binary_search(&new_member) {
		// If the search succeeds, the caller is already a member, so just return
		Ok(_) => Err(Error::<T>::AlreadyMember.into()),
		// If the search fails, the caller is not a member and we learned the index where
		// they should be inserted
		Err(index) => {
			members.insert(index, new_member.clone());
			Members::<T>::put(members);
			Self::deposit_event(RawEvent::MemberAdded(new_member));
			Ok(())
		}
	}
}
```

If it turns out that the caller is not already a member, the binary search will fail. In this case

> it still returns the index into the `Vec` at which the member would have been stored had he been

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it still returns the index into the `Vec` at which the member would have been stored had they been
```

> it still gives back the index into the `Vec` at which the member would have been stored had he been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it still returns the index into the `Vec` at which the member would have been stored had he been
```

present. We then use this information to insert the member at the appropriate location, thus
maintaining a sorted `Vec`.

## Removing a Member

> Removing a member is entirely straightforward. We begin by looking for the caller in the list. If

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Removing a member is straightforward. We begin by looking for the caller in the list. If
```

> the caller is not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, the search

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, the search
```

Author: ```suggestion
not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, the search
```

algorithm returns her index, and she can be removed.

```rust, ignore
fn remove_member(origin) -> DispatchResult {
	let old_member = ensure_signed(origin)?;

	let mut members = Members::<T>::get();

	// We have to find out where, in the sorted vec the member is, if anywhere.
	match members.binary_search(&old_member) {
		// If the search succeeds, the caller is a member, so remove her
		Ok(index) => {
			members.remove(index);
			Members::<T>::put(members);
			Self::deposit_event(RawEvent::MemberRemoved(old_member));
			Ok(())
		},
		// If the search fails, the caller is not a member, so just return
		Err(_) => Err(Error::<T>::NotMember.into()),
	}
}
```

## Performance

Now that we have built our set, let's analyze its performance in some common operations.

### Membership Check

> In order to check for the presence of an item in a vec set, we make a single storage read, decode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to check for the presence of an item in a `vec-set`, we make a single storage read, decode
```

the entire vector, and perform a binary search.

DB Reads: O(1) Decoding: O(n) Search: O(log n)

### Updating

> Updates to the set, such as adding and removing members, like we demonstrated, requires first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates to the set, such as adding and removing members as we demonstrated, requires first
```

> performing a membership check. In addition it requires re-encoding the entire `Vec` and storing back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performing a membership check. It also requires re-encoding the entire `Vec` and storing it back
```

> in the database.

Author: ```suggestion
in the database. Finally, it still costs the normal [amortized constant time](https://stackoverflow.com/q/200384/4184410) associated with mutating a `Vec`.
```

> DB Writes: O(1) Encoding: O(n)

Reviewer 2: Mutating a `Vec` in memory can re-allocate, which in turn means all the members are copied over to the new allocation. So adding a member is `O(1)` until the `Vec` is at capacity, and then it's `O(n)` for that addition, and then back to `O(1)` again. It's complicated! :)

Author: Good call. I added a bit about that.

### Iteration

Iterating over all items in a `vec-set` is achieved by using the `Vec`'s own

> [`iter` method](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.iter). The entire set can,
> again, be read from storage in one go, and each item must be decoded. Finally, the actual processing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`iter` method](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.iter). The entire set can
be read from storage in one go, and each item must be decoded. Finally, the actual processing
```

you do on the items will take some time.

DB Reads: O(1) Decoding: O(n) Processing: O(n)

> Because accessing the database is a relatively slow operation, only executing a single read while
> iterating the entire list is a big win. If your data will be iterated frequently, you may want a
> `vec-set`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because accessing the database is a relatively slow operation, reading the entire list in a single read is a big win. If you need to iterate over the data frequently, you may want a `vec-set`.
```

The merits and demerits of these data structures is a Big Topic™ that people still write PhD dissertations about; this here is obviously not a complete treatment of the subject. I think you're doing a good job of conveying the key point: the costly part is most likely database IO and if your set is small enough to easily fit in working memory, then `VecSet` is probably a good choice. For applications that need to make frequent changes to the data or are too big to load all-at-once, maps are good.
In classic computing, maps are often advocated for because of the `O(1)` lookup performance, but in Substrate this is not necessarily true because of how data is stored in the database (each node is an expensive db lookup); it's good that the text makes this difference obvious.
@danforbes for some context, I'd expect a DB read to be 10x-100x slower than a memory access. Maybe even more.

### A Note on Weights

It is always important that the weight associated with your dispatchables represent the actual time

> it takes to execute them. In this pallet we have provided an upper bound on the size of the set,
> which places an upper bound on the computation. Thus we get away with constant weight annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it takes to execute them. In this pallet, we have provided an upper bound on the size of the set,
which places an upper bound on the computation - this means we can use constant weight annotations.
```

Reviewer 2: I think `upper bound` is correct, otherwise 👍

Reviewer: You are correct...thank you!

> Your set operations should either have a maximum size, or a custom weight function that captures the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your set operations should either have a maximum size or a custom weight function that captures the
```
